Add experimental artifacts documentation (#8980)
PrefectHQ/prefect: docs/concepts/artifacts.md

# Artifacts

> Artifacts offer a means to publish and manage data that is rendered in the Prefect UI, making it easy to track and monitor your data over time. Published artifacts may be associated with a particular task run, flow run, or outside a flow run context. Artifacts provide a more advanced way to present information compared to typical logging practices-- including the ability to display tables, markdown, and links to external data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Artifacts are persisted outputs such as tables, files, or links. They can be published via the Prefect SDK or API. They can also be rendered and managed in the Prefect UI, making it easy to track and monitor your the objects that your flows produce and update over time. Published artifacts may be associated with a particular task run, flow run, or outside a flow run context. Artifacts provide a richer way to present information relative to typical logging practices-- including the ability to display tables, markdown, and links to external data.
```

## Artifacts Overview <span class="badge experimental"></span>

!!! warning "Artifacts are an experimental feature"
    Artifacts are an experimental feature and are subject to change in future releases.

> Whether you're publishing links, markdown, or tables, artifacts provide a powerful and flexible way to showcase data within your pipeline. By leveraging artifacts, you can easily manage and share information with your team, providing valuable insights and context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Whether you're publishing links, markdown, or tables, artifacts provide a powerful and flexible way to showcase data within your workflow. With artifacts, you can easily manage and share information with your team, providing valuable insights and context.
```

> Some potential use cases for artifacts are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Common use cases for artifacts include:
```

        key="gtm-report",
        markdown=my_important_report,
        description="Quarterly Sales Report",
    )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_flow()
```

After running the above flow, you should see your "gtm-report" artifact in the Artifacts page of the UI. As with all artifacts, you'll be able to view the associated flow run or task run id, previous and future versions of the artifact, your rendered markdown data, and your optional markdown description.

### Create Table Artifacts

You can create a table artifact by calling `create_table_artifact()`.

```python
from prefect import flow, task
from prefect.experimental.artifacts import create_table_artifact

def my_fn():
    highest_churn_possibility = {
        'customer_id': ['123456789', '987654321', '246810121', '135791113', '864208046'],
        'name': ['John Smith', 'Jane Doe', 'Bob Johnson', 'Sarah Jones', 'Tom Wilson'],
        'churn_probability': [0.85, 0.79, 0.67, 0.61, 0.57]
    }

    create_table_artifact(
        key="personalized-reachout",
        table=highest_churn_possibility,
        description= "# Marvin, please reach out to these customers today!"
    )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_fn()
```

> As you may notice, you don't need to create an artifact in a flow run context. You can use it however you like and still get the benefits in the Prefect UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As you can see, you don't need to create an artifact in a flow run context. You can use it however you like and still get the benefits in the Prefect UI.
```

## Managing Artifacts

### Reading Artifacts

In the Prefect UI, you can view all of the latest versions of your artifacts and click into a specific artifact to see its lineage over time. You can also use the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/read_artifacts_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts_filter_post) to programmatically filter your results.

### Deleting Artifacts

> To delete an artifact, simply do so directly in the Artifacts page in the UI. Alternatively, you can delete artifacts using the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/delete_artifact_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts__id__delete).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can delete an artifact directly from the Artifacts page in the UI. Alternatively, you can delete artifacts using the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/delete_artifact_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts__id__delete).
```

## Artifacts API

> Prefect provides the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts) to allow you to create, read, and delete artifacts programmatically. With the Artifacts API, you can automate the creation and management of artifacts as part of your data pipeline.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Prefect provides the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts) to allow you to create, read, and delete artifacts programmatically. With the Artifacts API, you can automate the creation and management of artifacts as part of your workflow.
```

To use it, remember to enable artifacts by running:
```bash
prefect config set PREFECT_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_ARTIFACTS=True
```

For example, to read the 5 most recently created markdown, table, and link artifacts, you can do the following:

```python
import requests

PREFECT_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_ARTIFACTS=True
PREFECT_API_URL="https://api.prefect.cloud/api/accounts/abc/workspaces/xyz"
PREFECT_API_KEY="pnu_ghijk"
data = {
    "sort": "CREATED_DESC",
    "limit": 5,
    "artifacts": {
        "key": {
            "exists_": True
        }
    }
}

headers = {"Authorization": f"Bearer {PREFECT_API_KEY}"}
endpoint = f"{PREFECT_API_URL}/experimental/artifacts/filter"

response = requests.post(endpoint, headers=headers, json=data)
assert response.status_code == 200
for artifact in response.json():
    print(artifact)
```

> If we don't specify a key or that the key exists, we will return result artifacts as well.

Author: ```suggestion
If we don't specify a key or that a key must exit, we will also return results (which are a key-less artifact).
```

> 

Author: @znicholasbrown mentioned that we shouldn't mention or elaborate on results being artifacts. Should we leave the above sentence as is, then? Or just remove it?

> 

Reviewer 2: Ah then that answers my earlier question of whether we want to link the two or not. If that's the case I'd suggest removing "making it easy to see where and when your results were written." from line 3 of  [docs/concepts/artifacts.md](https://github.com/PrefectHQ/prefect/pull/8980/files/189aa4f0731710308b6b62a1944e19cbd3207c05#diff-2afc6f000359fc8fc7a7b28f7595439c86a12ed14587e09edec93c140e9d1f07) Even if you're not specifically referencing results as the concept of results, it may be confusing.

> 

Author: Thanks, I have update the first paragraph. I will this sentence here for now then.

# Artifacts

> Artifacts offer a means to publish and manage crucial data that is rendered in the Prefect UI, making it easy to see where and when your results were written. Published artifacts may be associated with a particular task run, flow run, or outside a flow run context. Artifacts provide a more advanced way to present information compared to typical logging practices-- including the ability to display reports, tables, markdown, and links to external data.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Artifacts offer a means to publish and manage data that is rendered in the Prefect UI, making it easy to see where and when your results were written. Published artifacts may be associated with a particular task run, flow run, or outside a flow run context. Artifacts provide a more advanced way to present information compared to typical logging practices-- including the ability to display tables, markdown, and links to external data.
```

I don't think data has to be crucial to be included in an artifact so we can keep it simple and call it data.  

Do we want the connection to the concept of results here?  @billpalombi - maybe a question for you.

## Artifacts Overview <span class="badge experimental"></span>

!!! warning "Artifacts are an experimental feature"
    Artifact are an experimental feature and are subject to change in future releases.

> Whether you're publishing links, markdown, or tables, artifacts provide a powerful and flexible way to showcase important data within your pipeline. By leveraging artifacts, you can easily manage and share critical information with your team, providing valuable insights and context for your workflow runs. With the ability to publish links, markdown, tables, and more, artifacts make it easier than ever to stay organized and informed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whether you're publishing links, markdown, or tables, artifacts provide a powerful and flexible way to showcase data within your pipeline. By leveraging artifacts, you can easily manage and share information with your team, providing valuable insights and context. With the ability to publish links, markdown, tables, and more, artifacts make it easier than ever to stay organized and informed.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Whether you're publishing links, markdown, or tables, artifacts provide a powerful and flexible way to showcase important data within your pipeline. By leveraging artifacts, you can easily manage and share critical information with your team, providing valuable insights and context for your workflow runs. 
```

Suggestion only - I wonder if that last line sounds more like marketing than docs? I'd prefer to remove.

- Debugging: By publishing data that you care about in the UI, you can easily see when and where your results were written. If an artifact doesn't look the way you expect, you can find out which flow run last updated it, and you can click through a link in the artifact to the location where the artifact is stored (such as an S3 bucket).
- Data quality checks: Artifacts can be used to publish data quality checks from in-progress tasks. This can help ensure that data quality is maintained throughout the pipeline. During long-running tasks such as ML model training, you might use artifacts to publish performance graphs. This can help you visualize how well your models are performing and make adjustments as needed. You can also track the versions of these artifacts over time, making it easier to identify changes in your data.
- Documentation: Artifacts can be used to publish documentation and sample data from in-progress tasks. This can help you keep track of their work and share information with your colleagues. For instance, artifacts allow you to add a description to let your colleagues know why this piece of data is important. 

## Creating Artifacts

> To create artifacts, you need to set `PREFECT_EXPERIMENTAL_ENABLE_ARTIFACTS` to true. Once enabled, you can publish data from task and flow runs or outside of a flow run context. Currently, you can render three artifact types: links, markdown, and tables.

Reviewer 2: Do we need this or will we remove the experimental flag before release?

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion

```

Reviewer 3: I believe we will be announcing them as experimental? I'm not sure though @billpalombi

    You can specify multiple artifacts with the same key to more easily track something very specific that you care about, such as irregularities in your data pipeline. 

After running the above flows, you can find your new artifacts in the Artifacts page of the UI. You can click into the "irregular data" artifact and see all versions of it, along with custom descriptions and links to the relevant data.

Here, you'll also be able to view information about your artifact such as its associated flow run or task run id, previous and future versions of the artifact (multiple artifacts can have the same key in order to show lineage), the data you've stored (in this case a markdown-rendered link), an optional markdown description, and when the artifact was created or updated.

To make the links more readable for you and your collaborators, you can pass in a `link_text` argument for your link artifacts:

```python
from prefect import flow
from prefect.experimental.artifacts import create_link_artifact

@flow
def my_flow():
    create_link_artifact(
        key="my-important-link",
        link="https://www.prefect.io/",

>         link_text="Prefect",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        link_text="Prefect",
        description="Prefect link"
```

Author: You don't need to specify a description, so I'm trying to show a variety of examples.

Reviewer 2: That makes sense.  I updated the explanation suggestion above to reflect that.

Author: Nice 🧠

    )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_flow()
```

> 

Reviewer 2: Perhaps add an explanation of the example:

```suggestion
In the above example, the `create_link_artifact` method is used within a task to create a link artifact with a key of `my-important-link`. The `link` parameter is used to specify the external resource to be linked to, and `link_text` is used to specify the text to be displayed for the link. A `description` can also be added for context.
```

def my_fn():
    highest_churn_possibility = {
        'customer_id': ['123456789', '987654321', '246810121', '135791113', '864208046'],
        'name': ['John Smith', 'Jane Doe', 'Bob Johnson', 'Sarah Jones', 'Tom Wilson'],
        'churn_probability': [0.85, 0.79, 0.67, 0.61, 0.57]
    }

    create_table_artifact(
        key="personalized-reachout",
        table=highest_churn_possibility,
        description= "# Marvin, please reach out to these customers today!"
    )

if __name__ == "__main__":
    my_fn()
```

As you may notice, you don't need to create an artifact in a flow run context. You can use it however you like and still get the benefits in the Prefect UI.

## Managing Artifacts

### Reading Artifacts

In the Prefect UI, you can view all of the latest versions of your artifacts and click into a specific artifact to see its lineage over time. You can also use the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/read_artifacts_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts_filter_post) to programmatically filter your results.

### Deleting Artifacts

> To delete an artifact, simply do so directly in the Artifacts page. Alternatively, you can delete artifacts using the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/delete_artifact_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts__id__delete).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To delete an artifact, simply do so directly in the Artifacts page in the UI. Alternatively, you can delete artifacts using the [Prefect REST API](https://app.prefect.cloud/api/docs#tag/Artifacts/operation/delete_artifact_api_accounts__account_id__workspaces__workspace_id__experimental_artifacts__id__delete).
```
